[Music]
okay thanks thanks enry and yeah it's a
pleasure to be here um and to be invited
to speak at this uh event which I
believe is the last day of this event so
um yeah it's a real pleasure uh to be
with people and to hopefully talk about
um psychiatric abuses um so I'm
Professor hell spandler I'm um professor
of mental health at the University of
Lancashire in uh the in England UK in uh
north west of England I'm also the
editor of Asylum the radical Mental
Health
Magazine and I wanted to talk today
about the current mostly about the
current situation here in England and
how work I'm currently thinking about
psychiatric abuses
here so I just wanted to start really
with Asylum magazine which has been
established it was established in 1986
as the magazine for Democratic
Psychiatry and it was inspired by the
Democratic Psychiatry movement in Italy
the anti Psychiatry movement and also
the psychiatric Survivor
movement Asylum has a long history in
trying to yeah keep on that slide keep
on the first slide yeah thanks um Asylum
has a long history trying to uh expose
the abuse of
Psychiatry when we talk about the abuse
of Psychiatry I think we can think about
it in lots of different
ways so firstly we can think about it in
terms of Psychiatry itself as a form of
abuse which some people talk about or we
could also talk about Society using
Psychiatry or misusing Psychiatry as a
form of
abuse we can also talk about individuals
within Psychiatry using it to to abuse
patients but I want to talk today more
about a different form of abuse which
I've come to call psychiatric
neglect but just to go back to the issue
of Asylum and how we've have been trying
to expose
abuses in Psychiatry over the past
nearly 40
years are founders of the
magazine
were very much had this very much in
mind so the late Alec Jenner was one of
our Founders and he was the first
Western psychiatrist to call attention
to the political abuse of psychiatry in
the Soviet Union in the
1970s where Russian dissidents were
incarcerated in psychiatric hospitals
and treated as mentally
ill one of our other Founders and
psychiatric nurse Lynn Bigwood was
involved in whistleblowing the case of
two male psychiatrists ker and Haslam
who sexually assaulted and abused many
of their female clients in the 1980s
over a number of
years and patients who talked about this
abuse weren't believed because they were
seen as mentally
ill now this theme of disbelieving and
abusing psychiatric patients continues
in one form or another
today but it's important to State at the
outset that Psychiatry does not exist in
a
vacuum it's deeply entangled and
embedded within wider structural forms
of Oppression and it's often more
complicated than is often
assumed so not only does Psychiatry
reflect and reproduce it also sometimes
challenges prevailing social
inequalities and
oppression so if we think about
societal institutions and professions
they have a long history of for example
enforcing racism homophobia and
transphobia and this history is quite
well known mostly via psychiatric
diagnosis like the proposed diagnosis of
dramania homosexuality and
transsexuality as a mental
illness however perhaps psychiatric
resist resistance is less well known
for example dramania the psychiatric
diagnosis that was proposed for for
slaves who wanted to run away from their
uh slave owners was never actually
endorsed by psychiatry in fact the
emerging profession of Psychiatry of its
time mocked the idea that was proposed
by a a very
racist um
scientist who went on to establish a
very racist scientific project but
Psychiatry did not endorse this idea
that doesn't of course mean that
Psychiatry isn't institutional
racist because I think it is but I think
it's important to also acknowledge the
ways in which Psychiatry has sometimes
stood up against
oppression similarly in relation to
homosexuality
whilst homosexuality was certainly
figured as a mental
illness in various diagnostic
manuals there were also examples of
psychiatrists who resisted that idea and
actually supported patients to be openly
gay at a time when wider
Society prevented
that similarly with transsexuality or
transgender ident entity now um whilst
it's still very much heavily debated
unfortunately in in across the
world um many psychiatrists do enforce
the idea that transsexuality or
transgender is a mental illness but
there are some psychiatrists who are
gender affirming and actually support
trans people's right to transition or
for the medical transition or gender um
affirmation that they
need so when I referred before to the
different forms of psychiatric abuses I
wanted to refer now to what I think is
going on today in England
specifically and what I want to suggest
is that Psychiatry has
moved significantly in terms of what we
might frame now as abuse
and I think we're witnessing both
increasing
coercion and abuse of mad distressed and
psychosocially disabled people but we're
also experiencing a period of
psychiatric
neglect and I have and I think we have
to see these
simultaneously as they're
interrelated under modern neoliberal
capitalism so when Asylum magazine was
established nearly 40 years ago and I
think since that time we've seen the
progressive abandonment and
criminalization of mad distressed and
psychosocially disabled
people and we could argue that this
situation is no accident it's part of
what many scholars and activists has
have referred to as organized
abandonment many scholars have talked
about this specifically Ruth Gilmore in
the
States and what they mean by organized
abandonment is the process of governing
populations through callous yet
purposeful neglect framing humans and
some other life forms a surplus to our
contemporary political economic
order organized State abandonment also
requires
criminalization in order to main
maintain social order and manage the
Surplus population people who are no
longer economically viable to our
society there's a recent book called
Health communism that's worth reading on
this topic and I think this is why we've
seen both simultaneously a decrease in
psychiatric
hospitalization and an increase in the
prison
population they go hand in
hand so whilst the state and the welfare
state has retreated under
neoliberalism the state has also come in
to enforce with a hard
hand um an enforce coercion on those
people who are no longer able to survive
in this
system so what we're actually seeing
here in England are people who have
severe and enduring mental health
difficulties often although not always
related to past histories of
trauma Services being removed in the
name of individual responsibility
recovery and
inclusion and what's also interesting
about
this is that the is the current state is
mobilizing anti Psychiatry arguments as
a justification for
neglect so the idea that we don't need
that the idea of for example the problem
with institutionalization the problem
with medicalization the problem with
diagnosis
Etc are increasingly used as a
justification to prevent people
accessing
support Peter Sedwick predicted this
situation in his 1982 classic book
psychopolitics where he t talked about
how seemingly Progressive ideas could be
abused in contexts of it of a right-wing
um neoliberal conservative contexts so
in the UK the original the idea of
recovery for example has been used as a
stick to beat survivors with when
they're no long when they're not able to
recover and get back to work or off
support and
benefits an activist group in the UK
called recovery in the bin was formed a
decade or so ago now and talks about Neo
recovery as a form of neoliberal
recovery which is enforced on
patients to to force them out of
services out of B out of welfare
support so what we're increasingly
seeing as long-term service users who
are unable to recover in in the current
situation told to either go and see
their GP or attend accident emergency or
recur or um Emergency
Services if they continue to do that
they are often punished for being
so-called high intensity users in other
words they use service is too much
they're too much of a demand on
resources what we're increasingly seeing
is people being effectively
criminalized in order to prevent them
from becoming dependent on or a
so-called drain on resources and
services so we've seen in the last few
years a project called Sim Serenity
integrated monitoring
which is basically a project which tries
to prevent service users from using
Services too much and if they do demand
too much from services for example if
they continue to attend accident
emergency for suicidal thoughts for
example that the police often
intervene and they can even end up with
a criminal record so there one example
in in England where a woman who was who
was very
suicidal got a public order offense for
sitting on a bridge threatening
suicide or thinking about
suicide so there's been a campaign in
the UK called stop Sim to pre to try and
roll back this because it was introduced
to many Mental Health trusts in England
without any
evidence that it supported service users
more that it criminalized them so what
we're seeing is many people being left
to fend for
themselves some people do manage to
survive especially if they have the
emotional social or financial resources
to do
so others may take their own lives or
live in live lives of misery and some
even will commit crimes and some very
serious ones out of
confusion or
desperation some patients become so
distressed they may end up in forensic
units the BBC in the UK had a series
where it uncovered some of what was
happening in some forensic units in
England for example in n in
2022 an undercover
journalist went into a hospital in North
Manchester the edenfield
unit and highlighted the systematic
abuse of
patients which they were restrained
mocked and laughed
at by
staff
many of the patients were
autistic and had experienced serious
trauma and were ret
traumatized rather than this being a
medical model if you like where patients
were seen as ill and in need of
treatment what we actually witnessed was
a deeply punitive system where patients
were seen as wholly responsible for
their own
suffering and they were seen as being
needed to be subjected to regime of
punishment and
control so I think what we're seeing
here is a complicated situation
whereby um the classic idea of
Psychiatry enforcing biomedical model is
kind of something a bit
different we've seen a number of tragic
consequences of this
situation the other thing I must also
add is the welfare benefits system in
the UK which has been also increasingly
punitive to people on long-term sickness
or benefits and this has contributed to
this situation in a number of tragic
ways so what we've seen is a number of
uh an increase in suicides of long-term
service users individuals who might have
had their benefit their welfare benefits
cuted and also service users have been
discharged from services or sent to
private hospitals out of area and out of
placement with no support or
regulation just one recent example in
Greater Manchester a young black man
with a diagnosis of schizophrenia was
discharged into the community with with
little or no support when his mental
health deteriorated he attended accident
emergency as he was told to do begging
for support and asking to be admitted to
hospital when he was refused he later
drowned his own child believing he was
the devil and he is now in a
secure I think these things need to be
spoken about they're not easy to speak
about but these are some of the tragic
consequences of what I what call
organized
abandonment
yes and we're also seeing not only
psychiatric flect But continuing forms
of psychiatric abuse in the system
through restraint overmedicalization and
over coercion
particular
I think someone's got their camera on
which is I don't know if someone can
turn the camera off I mean they're
they're
um I'm still
sharing I'm hearing um yeah I don't know
who yeah is that better thank you yeah
we're cooking it's the it's the kitchen
my apologies that's okay don't worry
that's fine no it's completely fine my
apologies that's okay
okay so what is to be done with all this
um we can go on the next slide
now yeah
so this is a very difficult
situation I think and I think what we
have to start to do is start to find
ways to expose and fully acknowledge the
harms that we're witnessing all the
harms that we're witnessing ing not just
the harms that might fit our prevailing
ideology whatever that may
be we also must acknowledge both
historic and current
harms back in
2017 so six years ago myself and a a
trade unionist and
um
um Trade union activist and psychiatric
nurse Mick m Ken
proposed a Truth and Reconciliation
approach in Mental Health
Services it's often easy a Truth and
Reconciliation approach
like uh the South African Truth and
Reconciliation
approach where we start to actually hear
about some of the harms from people
who've been harmed within the system in
whatever way they've been
harmed this is a lot easier with past
harms that have been officially
recognized so for example in the UK
there starting to be after nearly 50
years recognition that things like
aversion therapy of lesbian and gay
people
um was a human rights abuse so the
British um col the Royal College of
Psychiatry has apologized for aversion
therapy and some universities who were
involved in developing aversion therapy
are starting to acknowledge some of
their
role in aversion
therapy but of course this isn't the
case with regarding conversion therapy
of trans people who are still subjected
to forms of conversion therapy because
it's not more it's not widely accepted
unfortunately that this is
wrong so what we are arguing is that we
need a bottom up
Grassroots restorative justice type
approach in the absence of formal
recognition so we start to get
acknowledgement from people themselves
about the harms that they've
experienced and bringing people together
who feel like they've been harmed in the
system as well as for people who feel
like they've been helped and all the
ways in which people feel they've been
harmed alongside professionals and
workers in the
system and to start to really listen
deeply to what people's experiences are
actually like both historically and
contemporary without imposing our own
ideology on that whether that's Pro
Psychiatry anti Psychiatry or we have an
alternative um psychiatry in mind
without an agenda and without imposing
alternative
Solutions it's important that any any
restorative justice approach like this
is led by people themselves who have
been harmed in the
system social justice can easily become
politicized by campaigners of all
Persuasions weaponized if you like with
The Unwanted consequence that the person
who's been
subjected to harm rarely gets to Define
what the harm is and how it should be
addressed so
what I'm trying to do is think about how
we can actually take this kind of agenda
forward both thinking about old forms of
psychiatric abuse that still continue in
some ways but also thinking about the
current situation in the UK of organized
abandonment so I'm currently trying to
do this through mediums like Asylum
magazine and also Zen more generally
small
self-published Zen and magazines and
pamphlets that people themselves might
make about their own experiences what
are often called
Pines and I'm trying to find ways in
which we can actually start to hear all
the different harms across the system
and Asylum for example is one way in
which survivors accounts are regularly
published and hopefully heard by people
in
power I think my um presentation has
disappeared but I wanted to end with a
couple of
slides
um but it doesn't matter if it's not
there um I've been working with an
organization called hope in the heart hi
thank
you yeah there we go that's the one
before that yeah I've been working with
an um an organization called hope in the
heart which is an Arts based project
that also support survivors to make Zen
and other forms of
artwork and to put on exhibitions to
people in power and this is one of the
most
powerful um P one of one of the one
powerful piece of artwork that Survivor
produced and when it was shown to a
mental health professional This Is How
They responded so in 25 years working in
healthc care I never saw your pain
expressed so
unequivocally I'm
sorry and I think we have to get to a
point where we start to get those kind
of responses and I think we've we've
we're a long way off being able to do
that we're a long long way off being
able to really hear the suffering of
people in the
system and we have to start to create
spaces in which those experiences can be
heard so I'm hoping that a platform like
this for example this Congress is one
way in which that can start to happen
and there are many other ways too for
example in some contexts people are
developing what's called healing
circles where people people get
together and start to listen without
interruption without judgment about
people's experiences of harm and neglect
in the
system so I just wanted to end really
with that message and the last slide are
some resources that are helpful in the
UK that I've referred to today so Asylum
magazine magines is a project I'm I'm
working on at the moment a great um blog
by a psychiatric Survivor called
Psychiatry is driving me mad the
national Survivor and user Network in
the K in the UK recovery in the bin that
I've referred to and also the stop Sim
campaign and there are many others but
they're just some of the things that
I've referred to
today so I'll leave it there thank
you
thank you so
much any
question H
[Music]
Fatima
is saying that there are very similar
situation scenarios in in Spain at the
moment Madrid
and it is very beautiful really
interesting and important to get to know
what's going on in the
UK
this uh resource hoping heard that you
said exist what is this about exactly if
if we can ask yes so it's an arts-based
organization um which works with people
who've
been
um either
psychiatric survivors homeless people
people in people've been in prison
people have had experienced trauma and
it works in an art-based kind of way to
start to I mean one of the one it does
lots of different things but one of the
one of the um projects it recently did
was an exhibition called messages from
the heart where they set up a number of
workshops where people could come
together create artwork as messages to
people in Power about about their
experiences and they put on an exhib a
very powerful
exhibition where they invited um you
know Mental Health Service Commissioners
professionals policy makers to actually
witness and see some of the um messages
from people that people had created and
people did some amazing artwork and
installations and made Zen about their
various
experiences and it was a very creative
way
of sharing those experiences so one of
my one of the um things I'm trying to do
is RA rather than just assuming that
everybody can sit in a room and talk
about their
experiences that some people might need
more creative ways to convey and
express their the harm that they've been
through and sometimes art poetry Zen
other ways of doing that can be equally
or perhaps even even more
effective so it's trying to expand the
idea of restorative
justice including talking and healing
circles but also to include more
creative and arts-based ways of
acknowledging expressing and recognizing
and hopefully
um uh addressing
harm
yeah I just noticed in the chat I also
wanted to highlight the importance of
testimony as a political weapon yeah I
don't know quite what you mean by that
but yeah it is I think I think what we
see in England at the moment is kind of
polar quite a lot of polarized politics
in all sorts of different
ways but especially in relation to
mental health politics there's a lot of
polarization around things like
diagnosis medication
Psychiatry um and and trans identities
and neurodiversity there's huge amounts
of
polarization and I think what we see is
people using personal
testimonies to argue for their own
cause um so you know if someone's been
helped by Psychiatry then someone will
use that to say this is what we need we
need more of this someone who's been
harmed by it says that we need to
abandon it all
someone who um say for example that
occasionally might be trans people who
detransition that's weaponized by the um
anti-trans uh Lobby to say that nobody
should transition because a few people
have decided that they didn't want to
transition anymore um so there's lots of
ways in which personal testimony can be
weaponized absolutely and I think that's
one of the reasons why we really need to
be present to it rather than just pick
and cherry-pick the the testimonies that
we believe in that fit our own ideology
or not because that's tends to be what
happens yeah we have a very V A virulent
I think that's the word anti-trans Lobby
in the UK um yeah and it's
um they're setting up new forms of
conversion therapy for Trans
people um they call it gender
exploratory therapy which sounds nice
but it's it's really a form of conver
it's a it's a subtle form of conversion
therapy we got the commissioner human
rights in the European Union saying that
all conversion is
stter say again sorry Henri I have not
the name in my memory but there is a
person working on human rights in the
European Union leading say that all
conversion attempts
are if she didn't use torture the United
Nations did it yet the them as we we
fully B this because it's important to
just say Joe Cox is an example of what
happened during that polarization of a
society for which reasons specifically
asking
for yeah I think there there it's
polarization is very dangerous um and
yeah it's increasingly what happens is
is people get um stuck in the firing
line they're in the firing line um and
used as sort of political
footballs um for various um different
camps if if you like um and it's yeah
with tragic consequences as you say yeah
with brexit or or whatever we're seeing
it here in the UK too and that's why I
think we need a way to bring uh people
together to really hear um people's
testimonies um and unless we start to do
that I don't think we can move forward I
think that's what that that's for me
increasingly um what we have to do
um and I hope that this this Congress is
one way in which that can start to
happen happen um and maybe there's more
ways I think there's plenty of different
ways but I think we're we're some way
off that at the
moment
um is there anybody working from
Academia in collecting the testimonies
or the
movement yeah I mean I think there are
um we have there's a there's a uh
there's the um a project called healing
Justice London that are collecting
testimonies from people people who have
been harmed by the welfare benefits
system and also people people who've
died as a result of the attacks on
welfare benefits in the UK uh it's a
project and also project Called Death by
welfare um so in that context they are
collecting testimonies in relation to
that and actually I've just been to an
exhibition that was put on in Manchester
um showcasing some of the um testimonies
and experiences and families of people
who died as as a result of um welfare
welfare reform they call it
but organized abandonment is the other
way of putting
it yeah and there are there are it's
dotted around different um places where
people are starting to try and collect
uh testimonies in different in different
contexts um so in Asylum we're always
trying to
um collect testimonies of of and also
from other countries too so if people
involved in this um Congress would be
very interested in obviously it's an
English-speaking magazine but we' be
very keen to incl we in very keen to
include testimonies about what's going
on in different parts of the
world because as I
think eedle I don't know how you spell
your name how you pronounce your name
but um
uh yeah there's some similarities in
different parts of the world but there's
also differences too and I think it's
really important to kind of understand
them
because if we only see psychatric harm
in one way we won't see how it can also
be used in a different
context so for example the the
weaponization of anti- diagnosis in the
UK at the moment where people are I mean
some people are actually being refused a
diagnosis or being refused support and
medicalization because it's seen as well
we can justify this
because we have friends in the UK that
need the mens for other conditions and
this is a resource bleeding towards
which end honest people doesn't want to
be on the drugs that costers from
whichever the
area how is that the pain not SE obvious
if they are setting it under the pile of
one after the
next yeah and there's also there's very
little support for people who want to
come off medication as well there's
because that requires
support so there's very little support
for people who want to come off so I
mean basically it's the the lack of
patient
autonomy that's that's that's what's
happened because there is no there's
very little a economy in a sense that's
been kind of despite the neoliberal idea
of choice and
control that's only available to you
know some people whereas a lot of people
have very little choice and control
whether they want to come off medication
or whether they actually want access to
to to the forms of medication that they
might feel would be helpful to them
um it's really messed
up
on my end hell we can set it here and
that is it my apologies because of the
noises during the cooking and let's hope
that we can all have dinner because at
the end we have seen the scenes in the
seaports
of any Coast in United Kingdom any other
place old factory towns whichever the
situation
in new situations old ones we had no
idea it was Iceland war for the
fishies looking at the present time how
that happen how the hell people is in
the streets not
even having the very minimum to have a
dignified life and this is them s
ourself when you say control it kind of
shock me to have it in the Liber uh
conversation but I got it it's them us
having the not anybody else controlling
so it's as controlling situation
individually is out of control the
situation in the UK how do you see it as
as a professor how will you synthetize
it is it falling
down the the system is collapsing the
health care can people get the the
care it's it's there's a systematic
attempt to dismantle the welfare state
um but there is resistance and it's not
completely dismantled There Are Places
and spaces where support is still
available um we still have a National
Health Service but it is being
increasingly eroded and privatized and
sold um so a lot of the mental health
services
exist now have been
um sold off to private companies who are
now running at for is it as a
profit um and that's happening across
the National Health Service um but I
mean we do have a you know it's just
it's it's still available but it's it's
not Universal Health Care as it as we as
it was envisaged in the post-war period
um um from cradle to grave and the idea
of a welfare state as being a place
where people's distress could be
contained and people who fell on hard
times for whatever reason would be
supported and there's been a systematic
attempt to dismantle that under the sort
of neoliberal
austerity um but I mean you know there's
lots of ways in which both service users
and staff are defending healthc care but
it puts us in a difficult position
because sometimes we're defending things
that we didn't particularly like in the
first place you know like psychiatric
hospitals are not the best place for
people in distress um they can be
terrible places for people in distress
um but Al sometimes we're you know we
can be we can be left defending those
things because we know that if they are
dismantled what what will be
left um so it puts activists in a very
difficult
position and that's happening across the
board with this happened in the 90s and
early 2000s with daycare as
well and day
centers so everything's become
increasingly privatized and
individualized such that um there's very
little Collective provision or very
little ways in which people are people
can come together to organize
collectively and that's also I suspect
to some extent
orchestrated are you aware that there is
a campaign to do a collective action or
similar from
m not exactly then at least it was
posted over there that a class
action I don't know the the details yeah
about me neither I think we can have we
can't do class actions in the UK I don't
think I don't think we we do not have
the chance to do it in Spain neither in
medical and I as far as I check in
European Union as I mean we need I mean
we could do with a class action but I'm
not sure that the we I've been arguing
for this in relation to many examples of
psychiatric abuse um
but I'm not sure I think it's the states
that do class action I I talked to
various lawyers here and but I might be
wrong but they they were saying there's
no we can't do CL a class action
suit
um yeah this is something I'm going to
include in the footnotes for the
transcript do you feel like we have to
add something else head to close the
event no I don't think so yeah sorry I
didn't um yeah apologies for the
presentation yeah I couldn't yeah I
found it hard to it was
wonderful and thank you so much I am
truly amazed of having had you
all everybody has been
wonderful yeah well I hope it's gone
well and I really apologize I haven't
been able to be at many the of the I did
come to the earlier Spanish uh some of
it but I I had the transcri rtion on but
I I tried to follow it but it's quite
hard to follow with the
transcription it did transcribe but it
was really hard to it didn't always
transcribe very well so I I got I got
the overall gist of it but not a lot of
it I didn't I couldn't follow
unfortunately because I was really
fascinated by the the the other talks um
and I would like to have been part of it
more but that's kind of hard
no problem we are going to use the post
afterwards to share notes if you want to
ask anything to any of the presenters we
can I I want to putther
develop in the in the transcripts and
and the publication one question the
nhas also have the shortage in in staff
and they are suffering because of the
shortage I mean mental health specify or
not the cuses but there are things that
is burn out too much working and happens
in medical doctors that have been
through the
ucation call them crazy from De [__] if
you if you did after all that and few
nights not sleeping you push it
harder how on Earth you're going to say
the same for somebody else's that I am
not creating
shoes nether asking you how many many
people is missing because of anything
but we we we hear about the shortages
and also the students get harder and
harder more
expensive and kind of more difficult to
reach United Kingdom to study even when
I was there some departments were
struggling economically that piles up
that
really it's a lot of depression pills
for an economic one or w
yeah I think that
um I mean it's it's a it's a perfect
storm he would call it it's um a recipe
for
disaster um because in terms of Mental
Health Services what you need is people
to be able to be fully present with
someone's distress and give them your
full attention and
compassion um in a situation like we're
seeing there it's almost impossible to
have that because there's no con there's
no welfare there's very little welfare
state anymore there's very little
containment there's very little sense in
which people have the time emotional
resources and support to be able to
offer that um and it's almost like the
support people are getting is worse than
getting I mean you know people being T
people who I I should have mentioned it
but people who
are um in intensely
suicidal who are asking for help as
they're told to do are told that you
have
capacity you to make a decision to end
your life so we can't do
anything um you know we're not going to
intervene we're not going to we're not
going to offer you any support we have
assessed you as having mental
capacity so um on your way if you choose
to kill yourself it's up to you and
that's the kind of
um that's the situation that we're left
with um because people are having to use
any
excuse
to um get people off the books and off
the off Services out of services because
they can't there's no support Avail very
little support available and it's so
heavily
rationed that this is what I mean when I
talk
about things being used justify
neglect
um and that's you know it's a perfect
storm in that sense you know it's it's a
it's an it's a disaster waiting to
happen well and it's not waiting to
happen it is happening we're seeing it
happening you know it's sink or swim for
for many
people hard to
serve trly and it is not a joke we we I
remember the news that we we read
because this kind of thing just at least
some of us have somebody wish not to
have an armor like I don't remember in
ch didn't cover that he did it on its
own in the backyard with an axe the hell
and so no it was painful chronic pain as
if we have to believe the the I don't
know if it was just the the Sun
anyhow there was no pleasure no no page
threes here we do not take credits for
anything that happens and it should not
probably he should not have cut his own
members and this is kind of the
conversion transform your own mentality
towards a better one it's not on our own
end to this idea that it's an equation
at the end it cost a lot of money if
that
treatment glorious the fear that I still
want the mathematics department on and
we can sacrifice another one what do we
cut from the University when it is truly
a a miracle that
well hell I prefer not to say anything
else only I wish I can visit you Som day
and would love that enrik I'd love that
very much I have been to Madrid I okay
do you know the
um I can't what they're called there's a
group in Madrid a Association
for I came and speak I spoke to a
a group in Madrid a few years ago before
covid I can't remember what they were
called now um but there were some good I
met some good people in Madrid a few
years back
um in case you go back edel any yes are
you based are you based in Madrid are
you based in
Madrid
yes I'm in Madrid now but in January I
have to go to Barcelona to a stance of
my M
thesis uh until May more or less
but yeah from Madrid and here there are
a lot of um movement
but
maybe not not the not
not I don't know but you
[Music]
um do you refer Association of trans
trans activism in Madrid or
another do you know what uh the
name which one did you visit when you
were in Madrid hell
oh I
think Adele was asking about um the
trans activists in in Madrid if you are
interested in getting to know them
yeah yeah the group I the group they
were a group of um mental health workers
and um
uh they were in a I can't remember the
name of them now I'll have to dig I'll
have I'll dig it out and let you know
because they
was no
no I'll find out and send it to Enrique
I've got your
email it was an
association Madrid Association for
mental health or something they
were they were the kind of they were at
split there was like at the radical
um end of the of the of the Mental
Health Association but I can't remember
what they were
called Fatima Ed we have the we fill the
gaps afterwards if you if you wish I can
exchange emails with your permission
okay yes yes of course and loving the
English language on itself my own two
feet I I my two eyes as well heading to
wherever you are H that you can you can
allow me to visit yeah I'm not saying
you as including anybody else here it's
it's lovely it's lovely that we learn
and we continue growing not many have
the chance when we keep it in mind that
yeah I'd love to um I'd love to find
ways to develop solidarity across um
different contexts I think because we
can learn from each other yes as well we
can learn from about how we can work
differently and how we can from
different contexts and different
situations we
can um the particular and local activism
and and violence of course like
different moments of politics and
laws for example in UK I think it's a
very big the the trans the anti-tr lobby
here is increasing but I don't know
what's happen in a few
years yeah it's um we may lose a member
or hopefully get many more like yeah we
are disconnected somehow as if you ever
want to write anything in English we
could we'd be very interested to receive
it for Asylum magazine or I can't
we can do like transl you can put you
can write something put it through a
Google translate or something and I can
help my English as well but that's good
I can understand you um yeah because I
mean I know a lot about the UK situation
but not so much about other contexts it'
be really good to hear about what's
happening in other contexts we have our
you know it's it's very helpful to
understand most definitely so yeah so
thank you so much for thank you thank
you coming and and talking uh to me most
definitely and thank you thank you again
to all of you we'll link that but
keeping on seeing if we can Tois
discover the art of restorative justice
and anything else that can be done we
learn from each other let's see how and
we
as it's to it's all not yeah our un
yours as well yes
let's let's stay in touch and try try
and work together somehow thank you so
much to meet you you thank you take have
have a have a good dinner I've had
mine thank you so
much by
bye